# sRNARFTarget: A machine learning-based approach for fast sRNA Target Prediction #
  
  ## Introduction

This repository contains all the code, data, results and supplementary files related to the 'sRNARFTarget' program for bacterial sRNA target prediction.
    
  ## Requirements

Requirements for running sRNARFTarget:
  1. Python3 (tested on 3.8.10)
  2. [Nextflow v21.04.1](https://www.nextflow.io/)
  3. Python modules: [pickle](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html), [biopython v1.79](https://biopython.org/), [pprint](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pprint.html), [scikit-bio v0.5.6](http://scikit-bio.org/), [itertools](https://docs.python.org/3/library/itertools.html), [scikit-learn v0.24.1](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/), [pandas v1.2.1](https://pandas.pydata.org/), [numpy v1.19.5](https://numpy.org/).
        
The following modules are additionally required for running sRNARFTarget_SHAP and sRNARFTarget_CP
  1. [shap v0.39](https://pypi.org/project/shap/), [pyCeterisParibus v0.5.2](https://github.com/ModelOriented/pyCeterisParibus) and matplotlib v3.3.4
  
These modules can be installed using pip.
             
  ## Instructions to run sRNARFTarget
  
  1. Clone the repository. For instructions about how to clone GitHub repositories see [this](https://docs.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/cloning-a-repository-from-github/cloning-a-repository).
  2. Create the fasta files with the sRNA and mRNA nucleotide (i.e, A,C,G,T) sequences in the folder containing the sRNARFTarget.nf script (referred from now on as sRNARFTarget folder/directory).
  3. Go to the sRNARFTarget folder so that it is the current working directory.
  4. Type the command below to run sRNARFTarget replacing sRNA.fasta (--s parameter) and mRNA.fasta (--m parameter) with the corresponding filenames of the fasta files containing the sRNAs and mRNAs sequences, respectively. Both files should be located in the sRNARFTarget directory.
   
    nextflow run sRNARFTarget.nf --s sRNA.fasta --m mRNA.fasta
   
  ## Creation of all possible sRNA-mRNA pairs
  
sRNARFTarget creates all possible pairs from the input sRNA and mRNA sequences. Each sRNA is paired with all mRNAs. For example, if the input sRNA file has 5 sRNA sequences and mRNA file has 9 mRNA sequences, then it will create 45 sRNA-mRNA pairs, 9 pairs per sRNA.
 
  ## sRNARFTarget Results
    
  1. On your terminal, you should see something like this after sRNARFTarget's execution:
  ```
  N E X T F L O W  ~  version 21.04.1
Launching `sRNARFTarget.nf` [gloomy_easley] - revision: 273666007b
executor >  local (5)
[d0/aab5ef] process > createAllPossiblePairs              [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
[08/c1a4ba] process > getsRNATrinucleotidesFrequncies (1) [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
[c8/e2134c] process > getmRNATrinucleotidesFrequncies (1) [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
[eb/0b3d90] process > runRandomForestModel (1)            [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
[c8/b7f154] process > generateSortedResultFile (1)        [100%] 1 of 1 ✔

Pipeline execution summary
---------------------------
Run as : nextflow run sRNARFTarget.nf --s Multocida_sRNA_gcvb.fasta --m Multocida_mRNA.fasta
Completed at: 2021-06-07T14:28:19.852-02:30
Duration : 40.7s
Success : true
workDir : Afolder/sRNARFTarget/work
exit status : 0
```
  2. sRNARFTarget are saved in the folder 'sRNARFTargetResult' which is created in the working directory. These folder will contain two files: Prediction\_probabilities.csv and FeatureFile.csv.
  * Prediction_probabilities.csv: this is the main result file and contains results sorted by predicted interaction probability from high to low, rounded to five decimals. It contains three columns, sRNA_ID, mRNA_ID and Prediction\_Probability. Here are some llines of a Prediction\_probabilities.csv file generated:
  ```
sRNA_ID mRNA_ID Prediction_Probability
gcvb    PM0494(+)       0.57444
gcvb    PM_RS03970(-)   0.55257
gcvb    PM_RS00560(-)   0.55193
gcvb    PM_RS06810(-)   0.54968
gcvb    PM_RS02870(+)   0.54926
gcvb    PM_RS00565(-)   0.54756
  ```
  * FeatureFile.csv: this file contains features for all the sRNA-mRNA pairs. This file consists of 66 columns. The first two columns are sRNA_ID and mRNA_ID. The remaining 64 columns are corresponding trinucleotide frequency difference of sRNA-mRNA pairs. This file is later used by sRNARFTarget interpretability scripts.

  ## Interpretation of sRNARFTarget Predictions 
  
  1. We created two python scripts for understanding the predictions generated by sRNARFTarget: sRNARFTarget_SHAP.py and sRNARFTarget_CP.py
  2. You need to run sRNARFTarget first so that the Prediction\_probabilities.csv and FeatureFile.csv files are generated.
     
   #### Instructions to run sRNARFTarget_SHAP
   
   1. Choose an sRNA-mRNA pair of interest from Prediction\_probabilities.csv file.
   2. Run sRNARFTarget_SHAP using the below command.
      
          python sRNARFTarget_SHAP.py sRNA_ID mRNA_ID
         
   Example usage: python sRNARFTarget_SHAP.py 'omrA' 'ompT'
   
   Make sure to use single quotations around the IDs and write the IDs exactly as they appear in the Prediction probabilities.csv.
   
   3. sRNARFTarget_SHAP will create a decisionPlot.pdf file and ForcePlot.html file
     
   #### Instructions to run sRNARFTarget_CP
   
   1. For the same sRNA-mRNA pair that was chosen to run sRNARFTarget_SHAP, choose a feature/variable by looking at the plots generated by sRNARFTarget_SHAP or any one variable of interest.
  2. Run sRNARFTarget_CP using the below command.
      
         python sRNARFTarget_CP.py sRNA_ID mRNA_ID feature_name
         
  Example usage: python sRNARFTarget_CP.py 'omrA' 'ompT' 'GCG'
  
  Make sure to use single quotations around each parameter, and write the sRNA and mRNA ID exactly as they appear in the Prediction probabilities.csv file.
  
  3. sRNARFTarget_CP.py will create a directory called \_plots_files and will open the file plots0.html automatically in the default web browser. This file contains an interactive plot showing the predicted interaction probability as a function of the value of the feature provided.
      
   ## Notes
1. sRNARFTarget can be run for any number of sRNAs and mRNAs at a time.
2. sRNARFTarget_SHAP program can be run only for one sRNA-mRNA pair at a time.
3. sRNARFTarget_CP can be executed only for single sRNA-mRNA pair and a single feature/variable at a time.
4. Make sure the folder sRNARFTargetResult is in your working directory when executing sRNARFTarget_CP.py and sRNARFTarget_SHAP.py. That folder should contain the files Prediction_probabilities.csv and FeatureFile.csv generated by sRNARFTarget.nf.
5. Note that you need to verify that all modules were installed in your default python version. In MacOS, for example, you might need to explicityly execute python as python3.

   ## Citation
   If you use this software please cite:
   
sRNARFTarget: A fast machine-learning-based approach for transcriptome-wide sRNA Target Prediction. Kratika Naskulwar and Lourdes Peña-Castillo. bioRxiv 2021.03.05.433963; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.05.433963 

